---
layout: paper
title: "LSH and G9a/GLP complex are required for developmentally programmed DNA methylation"
year: "2011"
shortref: "Myant et al. Genome Res. 2011. 21: 83-94"
nickname: 
journal: "Genome Research"
volume: 
issue: 21
pages: 83-94
authors: "Kevin Myant<sup>†</sup>, Ausma Termanis<sup>†</sup>, <strong>Arvind YM Sundaram</strong>, Tristin Boe, Chao Li, Cara Merusi, Joe Burrage, Jose I de Las Heras, Irina Stancheva"
image: /assets/images/papers/2010-12-13-myant-lsh.png
pdf: 
pdflink: http://genome.cshlp.org/content/21/1/83.full.pdf 
github: 
pmid: 21149390
pmcid: PMC3012929
f1000: 
figshare: 
doi: 10.1101/gr.108498.110
category: paper
published: true
tags: []
---
{% include JB/setup %}

# Abstract 

LSH, a member of the SNF2 family of chromatin remodeling ATPases encoded by the _Hells_ gene, is essential for normal levels of DNA methylation in the mammalian genome. While the role of LSH in the methylation of repetitive DNA sequences is well characterized, its contribution to the regulation of DNA methylation and the expression of protein-coding genes has not been studied in detail. In this report we investigate genome-wide patterns of DNA methylation at gene promoters in _Hells_<sup>−/−</sup> mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). We find that in the absence of LSH, DNA methylation is lost or significantly reduced at ∼20% of all normally methylated promoter sequences. As a consequence, a large number of genes are misexpressed in _Hells_<sup>−/−</sup> MEFs. Comparison of _Hells_<sup>−/−</sup> MEFs with wild-type MEFs and embryonic stem (ES) cells suggests that LSH is important for de novo DNA methylation events that accompany the establishment and differentiation of embryonic lineage cells. We further show that the generation of normal DNA methylation patterns and stable gene silencing at specific promoters require cooperation between LSH and the G9a/GLP complex of histone methylases. At such loci, G9a recruitment is compromised when LSH is absent or greatly reduced. Taken together, our data suggest a mechanism whereby LSH promotes binding of DNA methyltransferases and the G9a/GLP complex to specific loci and facilitates developmentally programmed DNA methylation and stable gene silencing during lineage commitment and differentiation. 

